---
layout: post
title:  "Harvard Way to Define Trace"
date:   2024-01-11
categories: blog math matrix trace linear-algebra tensor-product
---
$\newcommand\F{\mathbb{F}}\newcommand\R{\mathbb{R}}\newcommand\C{\mathbb{C}}\newcommand\Z{\mathbb{Z}}\newcommand\tr{\operatorname{trace}}\newcommand\End{\operatorname{End}}$
<p>
The trace of a sqaure matrix $A$ is defined to be the sum of the elements along the diagonal. A basic fact is that for any invertible matrix $M$,
\begin{equation}\tag{*} \tr(M^{-1}AM) = \tr(A). \end{equation}
</p>

<p>
Let $V$ be an $n$-dimensional vector space over a field $\F$.
The trace of a linear transformation $L: V \rightarrow V$ is usually defined as follows:
Let $(v_1, \dots, v_n)$ be a basis of $V$. There exists a matrix $A$ such that
$$ L(e_i) = A_i^je_j. $$
Then the trace of $L$ is defined to be
$$ \tr(L) = \tr(A). $$
Fact (*) implies that this the right side remains the same, no matter which basis of $V$ is used.
</p>

<p>
A natural question is whether there is a way to define the trace of a linear transformation directly without using a basis or matrix. This would prove (*). One way is to use the universal property of the tensor product of two vector spaces.
</p>

<p>
<b>Universal property of tensor product:</b> Let $V$ and $W$ be vector spaces over a field $\F$. The tensor product $V\otimes W$ is a vector space with a bilinear map
\begin{align*}
B: V\times W &\rightarrow V\otimes W\\
(v,w) &\mapsto v\otimes w
\end{align*}
such that the following universal property holds: For any vector space $Z$ and bilinear map
$$ b: V\times W \rightarrow Z, $$
there exists a unique linear map
$$ \bar{b}: V\otimes W \rightarrow Z $$
such that
$$
b = \bar{b}\circ B.
$$
</p>

<p>
<b>Space of linear transformations is tensor product:</b>
Let $\End(V)$ denote the space of linear transformations from $V$ to itself. The set of all rank $1$ linear transformations is the image of the following bilinear map
\begin{align*}
\phi: V \times V^* &\rightarrow \End(V),
\end{align*}
where for any $(v,\ell) \in V\times V^*$, the map $\phi(v,\ell): V \rightarrow V$ is the rank $1$ map such that for aany $w \in V$ to be
$$ \phi(v, \ell)(w) = (\ell(w))v. $$
By the universal property above, this extends uniquely to a linear map
$$ \bar\phi: V\otimes V^* \rightarrow \End(V). $$
It is straightforward to verify that $\bar\phi$ is an isomorphism.
</p>

<p>
<b>Trace of linear transformation:</b>
The trace of any rank 1 linear transformation is given by the following natural bilinear function
\begin{align*}
e: V \times V^* &\rightarrow \F\\
(v,\ell) &\mapsto \ell(v)
\end{align*}
By the universal property above, this extends uniquely to a linear map
$$
\bar{e}: V\otimes V^* \rightarrow \F.
$$
The trace of a linear transformation $L \in \End(V)$ can now be defined to be
$$
\tr(L) = \bar{e}\circ\bar{\phi}^{-1}(L).
$$
</p>

<p>
<em>Acknowledgement:</em> This post was inspired by <a href="https://web.math.princeton.edu/generals/alpoge_levent">Levent Alpoge's Princeton PhD generals exam</a>. Just look for "Harvard way".
</p>