I've had an interesting history. At Poly, we had long term department heads instead of rotating department chairs. Soon after I got there, the administration and our department head weren't getting along, so, as a new faculty not yet disliked by anyone, I was asked to take over. Soon after that, the faculty decided they were tired of the same old faculty leadership and I got asked to serve as speaker of the faculty. This meant not only that I chaired all university faculty meetings but I would attend weekly meetings of the university leadership (president, provost, vice provosts, vice presidents) as well as the semiannual board of trustees meetings. So I got an inside view of almost everything. It was a conflict of interest from almost any angle. I continued to serve as faculty speaker, on and off, both before and after my stint on Wall Street. The last time, I would meet monthly for breakfast with the board chair at the Starbucks inside Trump Tower. I got along with him fine, but the meetings were totally useless.
Basically, everyone seems to mean well and is trying to make the best decisions they can. But they aren't able to know when they simply don't have the knowledge or experience make a certain decision and defer to people who have better knowledge and judgment. Instead, what they do is "keep an open mind", "listen to expert advice", and then make the decision they want, even if goes against all the facts and analyses they were given.
I think it's rather difficult to pursue a career in university administration without making serious compromises in your personal integrity. I think the most successful leaders are often the ones who don't actually want to be the leader, so they don't feel any need to compromise their integrity.